docs/user-service.md, before:

# User Service API Documentation

## Overview

The User Service is responsible for managing user-specific data within the Splitwiser application. This includes retrieving user profiles, updating preferences, and handling account deletion. It works in conjunction with the Auth Service, which manages authentication and identity.

## Key Features

- **User Profile Management**: Allows users to view and update their personal information.
- **Preference Settings**: Enables users to customize their experience (e.g., default currency).
- **Account Deletion**: Provides a secure way for users to delete their accounts.

## API Endpoints

All endpoints require a valid `Authorization: Bearer <access_token>` header.

### 1. Get Current User Profile

Retrieves the profile information for the currently authenticated user.

- **Endpoint**: `GET /users/me`
- **Authorization**: `Bearer <access_token>`

**Successful Response (200 OK):**

```json
{
  "user": {
    "_id": "507f191e810c19729de860ea",
    "name": "John Doe",
    "email": "john.doe@example.com",
    "imageUrl": "https://example.com/profiles/john.doe.jpg",
    "currency": "USD",
    "createdAt": "2024-01-10T10:00:00Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-06-01T14:30:00Z"
  }
}
```

**PlantUML Diagram:**

```plantuml
@startuml GetUserProfile
actor User
participant App as "Client App"
participant API_Gateway as "API Gateway"
participant UserService as "User Service (FastAPI)"
participant AuthMiddleware as "Auth Middleware"
participant DB as "MongoDB (users collection)"

User -> App: Request Profile
App -> API_Gateway: GET /users/me (Authorization: Bearer token)
API_Gateway -> AuthMiddleware: Verify token
AuthMiddleware --> API_Gateway: Token valid, user_id extracted
API_Gateway -> UserService: GET /users/me (user_id)
UserService -> DB: findUserById(user_id)
DB --> UserService: User document
UserService --> API_Gateway: { user: { ... } }
API_Gateway --> App: 200 OK { user: { ... } }
App --> User: Display Profile
@enduml
```

### 2. Update User Profile & Preferences

Allows the currently authenticated user to update their profile information and preferences.

- **Endpoint**: `PATCH /users/me`
- **Authorization**: `Bearer <access_token>`
- **Request Body**:

  ```json
  {
    "name": "Johnathan Doe",
    "imageUrl": "https://example.com/profiles/johnathan_doe_new.jpg",
    "currency": "EUR"
  }
  ```
  *All fields are optional. Only provided fields will be updated.*

**Successful Response (200 OK):**

```json
{
  "user": {
    "_id": "507f191e810c19729de860ea",
    "name": "Johnathan Doe",
    "email": "john.doe@example.com",
    "imageUrl": "https://example.com/profiles/johnathan_doe_new.jpg",
    "currency": "EUR",
    "createdAt": "2024-01-10T10:00:00Z",
    "updatedAt": "2025-06-11T10:15:00Z"
  }
}
```

**PlantUML Diagram:**

```plantuml
@startuml UpdateUserProfile
actor User
participant App as "Client App"
participant API_Gateway as "API Gateway"
participant UserService as "User Service (FastAPI)"
participant AuthMiddleware as "Auth Middleware"
participant DB as "MongoDB (users collection)"

User -> App: Edit Profile (name, imageUrl, currency)
App -> API_Gateway: PATCH /users/me (Authorization: Bearer token, body: {updates})
API_Gateway -> AuthMiddleware: Verify token
AuthMiddleware --> API_Gateway: Token valid, user_id extracted
API_Gateway -> UserService: PATCH /users/me (user_id, {updates})
UserService -> DB: findUserByIdAndUpdate(user_id, {updates})
DB --> UserService: Updated user document
UserService --> API_Gateway: { user: { ...updated_user... } }
API_Gateway --> App: 200 OK { user: { ...updated_user... } }
App --> User: Show "Profile Updated"
@enduml
```

### 3. Delete Own Account

Allows the currently authenticated user to delete their account. This is a critical operation and should involve a confirmation step on the client-side.

- **Endpoint**: `DELETE /users/me`
- **Authorization**: `Bearer <access_token>`

**Successful Response (200 OK):**

```json
{
  "success": true,
  "message": "User account scheduled for deletion."
}
```
*(Note: Actual deletion might be a soft delete or a background process. The message can reflect this.)*

**Considerations for Deletion:**
- **Data Anonymization/Deletion**: Decide on a strategy for user-related data in other services (e.g., expenses, groups). Anonymize or delete as per application policy.
- **Grace Period**: Consider a grace period before permanent deletion, allowing users to recover their account.
- **Impact on Shared Data**: Inform users about what happens to groups or expenses they created or participated in.

**PlantUML Diagram:**

```plantuml
@startuml DeleteUserAccount
actor User
participant App as "Client App"
participant API_Gateway as "API Gateway"
participant UserService as "User Service (FastAPI)"
participant AuthMiddleware as "Auth Middleware"
participant DB as "MongoDB (users collection)"
participant OtherServices as "Group/Expense Services"

User -> App: Request Account Deletion
App -> App: Show Confirmation Dialog
User -> App: Confirm Deletion
App -> API_Gateway: DELETE /users/me (Authorization: Bearer token)
API_Gateway -> AuthMiddleware: Verify token
AuthMiddleware --> API_Gateway: Token valid, user_id extracted
API_Gateway -> UserService: DELETE /users/me (user_id)
UserService -> DB: Mark user for deletion / Delete user (user_id)
DB --> UserService: Deletion successful
UserService -> OtherServices: (Optional) Trigger data anonymization/cleanup for user_id
OtherServices --> UserService: Cleanup acknowledged
UserService --> API_Gateway: { success: true, message: "..." }
API_Gateway --> App: 200 OK { success: true, message: "..." }
App --> User: Show "Account Deleted" + Logout
@enduml
```

## Data Models Alignment

The User Service primarily interacts with the `users` collection in MongoDB.

**`users` Collection (from `nonrelational-database-schema.md`):**
```javascript
{
  _id: ObjectId,
  name: String,              // User's full name
  email: String,             // Unique email address (indexed)
  passwordHash: String,      // Hashed password (managed by Auth Service)
  imageUrl: String,          // Profile picture URL (optional)
  currency: String,          // Preferred currency (ISO 4217, default: "USD")
  createdAt: Date,
  updatedAt: Date            // Last profile update timestamp
}
```

- `GET /users/me` reads from this collection, omitting `passwordHash`.
- `PATCH /users/me` updates permissible fields (`name`, `imageUrl`, `currency`) and `updatedAt`.
- `DELETE /users/me` marks the document for deletion or removes it, potentially triggering actions on related data.

## Error Handling

Standard HTTP error codes will be used:

- **400 Bad Request**: Invalid request payload (e.g., invalid currency code).
  ```json
  {
    "error": "InvalidInput",
    "message": "Validation failed.",
    "details": {
      "currency": "Must be a valid ISO 4217 currency code."
    }
  }
  ```
- **401 Unauthorized**: Invalid or missing access token.
  ```json
  {
    "error": "Unauthorized",
    "message": "Authentication token is missing or invalid."
  }
  ```
- **404 Not Found**: User not found (should generally not happen for `/users/me` if token is valid, but good practice).
- **500 Internal Server Error**: Unexpected server-side error.

## Rate Limiting

- **`GET /users/me`**: 60 requests/minute per user.
- **`PATCH /users/me`**: 20 requests/minute per user.
- **`DELETE /users/me`**: 5 requests/hour per user (to prevent abuse).

## Caching Strategy

- **User Profile Data (`GET /users/me`)**:
  - Can be cached client-side.
  - Server-side caching can be employed (e.g., Redis) with a short TTL (e.g., 1-5 minutes) or invalidated upon `PATCH /users/me`.
  - `ETag` headers can be used for conditional requests to save bandwidth.

Commit message:

Enhance API documentation across multiple services, including detailed endpoint summaries and related service references for Auth, User, Group, Expense, and Non-Relational Database Schema.

docs/user-service.md, after:

# User Service API Documentation

## Overview

The User Service is responsible for managing user-specific data within the Splitwiser application. This includes retrieving user profiles, updating preferences, and handling account deletion. It works in conjunction with the [Auth Service](./auth-service.md), which manages authentication and identity.

## API Endpoint Summary

| Method | Endpoint         | Description                          |
|--------|------------------|--------------------------------------|
| GET    | [`/users/me`](#1-get-current-user-profile)      | Get current user profile             |
| PATCH  | [`/users/me`](#2-update-user-profile--preferences) | Update profile & preferences         |
| DELETE | [`/users/me`](#3-delete-own-account)        | Delete own account                   |

## Key Features

- **User Profile Management**: Allows users to view and update their personal information.
- **Preference Settings**: Enables users to customize their experience (e.g., default currency).
- **Account Deletion**: Provides a secure way for users to delete their accounts.

## API Endpoints

All endpoints require a valid `Authorization: Bearer <access_token>` header.

### 1. Get Current User Profile

Retrieves the profile information for the currently authenticated user.

- **Endpoint**: `GET /users/me`
- **Authorization**: `Bearer <access_token>`

**Successful Response (200 OK):**

```json
{
  "user": {
    "_id": "507f191e810c19729de860ea",
    "name": "John Doe",
    "email": "john.doe@example.com",
    "imageUrl": "https://example.com/profiles/john.doe.jpg",
    "currency": "USD",
    "createdAt": "2024-01-10T10:00:00Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-06-01T14:30:00Z"
  }
}
```

**PlantUML Diagram:**

```plantuml
@startuml GetUserProfile
actor User
participant App as "Client App"
participant API_Gateway as "API Gateway"
participant UserService as "User Service (FastAPI)"
participant AuthMiddleware as "Auth Middleware"
participant DB as "MongoDB ([users collection](../nonrelational-database-schema.md#1-users-collection))"

User -> App: Request Profile
App -> API_Gateway: GET /users/me (Authorization: Bearer token)
API_Gateway -> AuthMiddleware: Verify token
AuthMiddleware --> API_Gateway: Token valid, user_id extracted
API_Gateway -> UserService: GET /users/me (user_id)
UserService -> DB: findUserById(user_id)
DB --> UserService: User document
UserService --> API_Gateway: { user: { ... } }
API_Gateway --> App: 200 OK { user: { ... } }
App --> User: Display Profile
@enduml
```

### 2. Update User Profile & Preferences

Allows the currently authenticated user to update their profile information and preferences.

- **Endpoint**: `PATCH /users/me`
- **Authorization**: `Bearer <access_token>`
- **Request Body**:

  ```json
  {
    "name": "Johnathan Doe",
    "imageUrl": "https://example.com/profiles/johnathan_doe_new.jpg",
    "currency": "EUR"
  }
  ```
  *All fields are optional. Only provided fields will be updated.*

**Successful Response (200 OK):**

```json
{
  "user": {
    "_id": "507f191e810c19729de860ea",
    "name": "Johnathan Doe",
    "email": "john.doe@example.com",
    "imageUrl": "https://example.com/profiles/johnathan_doe_new.jpg",
    "currency": "EUR",
    "createdAt": "2024-01-10T10:00:00Z",
    "updatedAt": "2025-06-11T10:15:00Z"
  }
}
```

**PlantUML Diagram:**

```plantuml
@startuml UpdateUserProfile
actor User
participant App as "Client App"
participant API_Gateway as "API Gateway"
participant UserService as "User Service (FastAPI)"
participant AuthMiddleware as "Auth Middleware"
participant DB as "MongoDB ([users collection](../nonrelational-database-schema.md#1-users-collection))"

User -> App: Edit Profile (name, imageUrl, currency)
App -> API_Gateway: PATCH /users/me (Authorization: Bearer token, body: {updates})
API_Gateway -> AuthMiddleware: Verify token
AuthMiddleware --> API_Gateway: Token valid, user_id extracted
API_Gateway -> UserService: PATCH /users/me (user_id, {updates})
UserService -> DB: findUserByIdAndUpdate(user_id, {updates})
DB --> UserService: Updated user document
UserService --> API_Gateway: { user: { ...updated_user... } }
API_Gateway --> App: 200 OK { user: { ...updated_user... } }
App --> User: Show "Profile Updated"
@enduml
```

### 3. Delete Own Account

Allows the currently authenticated user to delete their account. This is a critical operation and should involve a confirmation step on the client-side.

- **Endpoint**: `DELETE /users/me`
- **Authorization**: `Bearer <access_token>`

**Successful Response (200 OK):**

```json
{
  "success": true,
  "message": "User account scheduled for deletion."
}
```
*(Note: Actual deletion might be a soft delete or a background process. The message can reflect this.)*

**Considerations for Deletion:**
- **Data Anonymization/Deletion**: Decide on a strategy for user-related data in other services (e.g., expenses, groups). Anonymize or delete as per application policy.
- **Grace Period**: Consider a grace period before permanent deletion, allowing users to recover their account.
- **Impact on Shared Data**: Inform users about what happens to groups or expenses they created or participated in.

**PlantUML Diagram:**

```plantuml
@startuml DeleteUserAccount
actor User
participant App as "Client App"
participant API_Gateway as "API Gateway"
participant UserService as "User Service (FastAPI)"
participant AuthMiddleware as "Auth Middleware"
participant DB as "MongoDB ([users collection](../nonrelational-database-schema.md#1-users-collection))"
participant OtherServices as "[Group](./group-service.md)/[Expense](./expense-service.md) Services"

User -> App: Request Account Deletion
App -> App: Show Confirmation Dialog
User -> App: Confirm Deletion
App -> API_Gateway: DELETE /users/me (Authorization: Bearer token)
API_Gateway -> AuthMiddleware: Verify token
AuthMiddleware --> API_Gateway: Token valid, user_id extracted
API_Gateway -> UserService: DELETE /users/me (user_id)
UserService -> DB: Mark user for deletion / Delete user (user_id)
DB --> UserService: Deletion successful
UserService -> OtherServices: (Optional) Trigger data anonymization/cleanup for user_id
OtherServices --> UserService: Cleanup acknowledged
UserService --> API_Gateway: { success: true, message: "..." }
API_Gateway --> App: 200 OK { success: true, message: "..." }
App --> User: Show "Account Deleted" + Logout
@enduml
```

## Data Models Alignment

The User Service primarily interacts with the [`users` collection](../nonrelational-database-schema.md#1-users-collection) in MongoDB.

**[`users` Collection (from `nonrelational-database-schema.md`](../nonrelational-database-schema.md#1-users-collection)):**
```javascript
{
  _id: ObjectId,
  name: String,              // User's full name
  email: String,             // Unique email address (indexed)
  passwordHash: String,      // Hashed password (managed by Auth Service)
  imageUrl: String,          // Profile picture URL (optional)
  currency: String,          // Preferred currency (ISO 4217, default: "USD")
  createdAt: Date,
  updatedAt: Date            // Last profile update timestamp
}
```

- `GET /users/me` reads from this collection, omitting `passwordHash`.
- `PATCH /users/me` updates permissible fields (`name`, `imageUrl`, `currency`) and `updatedAt`.
- `DELETE /users/me` marks the document for deletion or removes it, potentially triggering actions on related data from other services like [Group Service](./group-service.md) or [Expense Service](./expense-service.md).

## Error Handling

Standard HTTP error codes will be used:

- **400 Bad Request**: Invalid request payload (e.g., invalid currency code).
  ```json
  {
    "error": "InvalidInput",
    "message": "Validation failed.",
    "details": {
      "currency": "Must be a valid ISO 4217 currency code."
    }
  }
  ```
- **401 Unauthorized**: Invalid or missing access token.
  ```json
  {
    "error": "Unauthorized",
    "message": "Authentication token is missing or invalid."
  }
  ```
- **404 Not Found**: User not found (should generally not happen for `/users/me` if token is valid, but good practice).
- **500 Internal Server Error**: Unexpected server-side error.

## Rate Limiting

- **`GET /users/me`**: 60 requests/minute per user.
- **`PATCH /users/me`**: 20 requests/minute per user.
- **`DELETE /users/me`**: 5 requests/hour per user (to prevent abuse).

## Caching Strategy

- **User Profile Data (`GET /users/me`)**:
  - Can be cached client-side.
  - Server-side caching can be employed (e.g., Redis) with a short TTL (e.g., 1-5 minutes) or invalidated upon `PATCH /users/me`.
  - `ETag` headers can be used for conditional requests to save bandwidth.
